[Music] good day I'm Norman Wildberger
in this important and exciting lecture
I'm going to introduce to you the second most
important theorem in all of mathematics which
is the triple quad formula it's a sister
theorem to the most important theorem in
mathematics which I hope we all appreciate is
Pythagoras's Theorem now that's putting aside
the laws of arithmetic which are sort of on a a
different level okay but when it comes to just
sort of theorems what we usually call theorems
I'm pretty confident that these are the first and
second most important theorems in the subject and
this theorem that we're going to be talking about
today really provides evidence for the usefulness
the utility of this rational point of view towards
mathematics where we insist that everything be
logical and write downable and we give up on the
infinite real number dream that currently forms a
foundation for a lot of mathematics so this is a
some evidence of the the power and the utility
of this point of view that I'm advocating okay
the triple quad formula was clearly enunciated in
my book Divine proportions rational trigonometry
to Universal geometry but in fact its Origins can
be traced back much earlier to the ancient Greeks
in fact to Archimedes it's a result about three
points on a line or three colinear points which
is sort of a parallel situation to Pythagoras's
Theorem which is about three points forming a
right triangle in fact these two results are very
closely connected and they're inter reaction is
very interesting and I think it's no exaggeration
to say that they form the pillars of pretty well
all of metrical geometry let's begin by asking
a question the question is how do we measure in
apine Geometry so here's our picture of apine
geometry which is just a line and here are two
points point a and point B and I remind you that
a in the one dimension situation a point or what
we called a one point but we'll just refer to them
as points now because we're only in onedimensional
Geometry for today a point is just a rational
number enclosed in square brackets so here we
have 1 Point a another point B and natural
question is how are we going to measure how
far apart those two points are fundamental kind of
beginning question well if you're used to the real
number story and you've been sort of trained
in the standard way of thinking about things
you will automatically say oh well the right
notion is that of length or distance okay so
the distance between a and b sometimes denoted
with absolute value bars like this or perhaps
with a d of a this is defined as the absolute
value of B minus a in the one-dimensional case
defining length and distance is simpler than
in the two-dimensional case because we don't
have to have a square root just an absolute value
suffices and let me remind you that the absolute
value operation is this one here so if R is
a rational number then the absolute value of
R means well there's two possibilities if R is
bigger than or equal to zero then the ABS abute
value equals R and if R is less than zero then
the absolute value equals minus r this ensures
that the absolute value of any number is always
positive greater than or equal to zero so for
example if a is the 3 Hales and B is the 1/5 then
the distance between a and b or if you prefer the
length of the segment between them is according
to the formula the absolute value of 1/5 - 3 and
we get a common denominator of say 10 this is
210 - 15/10 that's - 13/10 so we have to take
the absolute value of that and because this is
a negative number the rule says we have to take
negative of this which is POS 13 /1 so this is
the distance between these two points and most
students of mathematics would say this is the
natural and reasonable way of measuring the
separation of these two points but for us this
is just one possibility we'll see that there are
other possibilities and we'll also see that in
fact there's a more important and more natural
notion this notion of distance between one points
has some familiar properties first of all it's
symmetric it means that the distance between
A and B is the same as the distance between
b and a that's because of the absolute value
operation that we're employing in addition the
distance between A and B is zero precisely when
a equals B so distance being zero means that the
points actually are equal or coincide now what
happens if we have three points say A1 A2 A3
and I'll use indices here because it's a little
bit easier to keep track of the various objects
that I have indices rather than using a b or c
all right so suppose A1 A2 A3 are one points and
we'll Define three distances D1 will be defined
to be the distance between A2 and A3 that's D1
there and that picture D2 will be defined to be
the distance between A1 and A3 so that distance
there and D3 will be defined to be the distance
between A1 and A2 that one there all right so
then there are three possible things that can
happen then either D1 + D2 = D3 or D2 + D3 = D1
or D1 + D3 = D2 in this particular situation when
the points have this particular order relation
with A2 in between A1 and A3 then the relation
turns out to be that D3 + D1 = D2 this one
here so when you're working over the real
numbers when you're using distance as the
fundamental way of measuring separation between
points if you have three points on a line then
the relationship between the three distances
is a linear relation but we're not entirely
sure which linear relation it is until we know
the relative positions of the three points all
right so your exercise is just to make sure that
you're happy with this proposition so prove this
proposition and you'll see I think that the
absolute value sign that's appearing crucially
in the notion means that you have to deal with
various cases this is typical of arithmetic with
absolute values you have to break things up into
cases which makes the algebraic aspect a little
bit uh more onerous than it usually is with
just the usual for algebraic operations let's
return to this question of how do we measure in
aine Geometry because that answer that we gave
using distance or length was only one of several
possible answers let's have a look at a different
answer which is that of displacement all right so
let's define that so if a equals bracket a and b
equals bracket B are two points or one points
then here's the definition of the displacement
between A and B okay so the displacement between
A and B is by definition B minus a the same thing
that occurred in the distance or length formula
but crucially without an absolute value so the
displacement is like a distance except that
it can be positive or negative sometimes the
displacement is referred to as a signed distance
but I prefer to just think about it as something
separate we'll call it displacement this is a
purely algebraic operation that's good but it
is skew symmetric what this means is the
following that the displacement between
b and a is negative the displacement between
A and B the displacement between A and B is
B minus a while the displacement between b and
a would be a minus B and they're negatives of
each other the other property of the distance
is still preserved the displacement between
two points is zero precisely when the two points
actually agree and what happens if we have three
points a b and c on our aine line then here is a
proposition for you to prove the the displacement
between A and B plus the displacement between
B and C equals the displacement between a and
C independent of the relative positions of
the three points so this is different from
the distance situation the distance situation
we had three different possibilities depending
on the relative positions of the points here
we have sort of a uniform formula for these
three displacements and it's an easy exercise
I hope for you to prove that now let's return
to this fundamental question a third time
how do we measure an aine geometry our third
answer is the notion of quadrants so if a is
bracket A and B is bracket b or two one points
then here is the definition of the quadrants
between A and B it is B minus a squared b - A
Squared this is purely algebraic it doesn't
have an absolute value sign in it and it is
symmetric the quadrants between b and a equals
the quadrants between A and B this is a happy
situation the fact that it's algebraic is very
good okay so you take a big step forward in your
understanding of mathematics when you begin to
appreciate the utility of thinking algebraically
and symmetrically when you start to understand
and appreciate that the quadrants is in many
ways superior to the notion of distance or
displacement when it comes to measuring the
separation between two points even two points on
a line mathematically this is the right way of
thinking now I'm telling you that from a position
of considerable experience on this subject but for
you uh you can slowly start to move towards
the position I don't expect you to adopt it
immediately okay but be willing to consider
evidence and there's lots of evidence for this
claim clearly the quadrant between A and B
is zero also precisely when a equals B and
now we come to a question a very interesting
question okay which is the analog of the two
results that we had a look at in the distance and
displacement case so if we have three points A1
A2 A3 they aine one points then what is the
relation between the three quadran that are
formed by those three points so if we Define
q1 to be the quadrants between A2 and A3 Q2
is the quadrant between A1 and A3 and Q3 is
the quadrants between A1 and A2 the question
is what is the relationship between these
three numbers this is a very important and
interesting question it probably should have
been answered by the ancient Greeks and perhaps
in some sense it was as we'll talk about in our
next video but for most of you if you haven't
studied rational trigonometry before it will be
a new kind of relation that you probably are not
that familiar with it's an excellent exercise
for you if you haven't seen this relationship
before before to stop this video now and spend
an hour finding this relation even if you're a
professional mathematician in fact especially if
you're a professional mathematician or a graduate
student in mathematics okay this is an excellent
use of an hour of your time is to consider this
very Elementary but very fundamental problem and
to figure out what the relationship is yourself
then you will own this relation in a way that
you probably won't if I just tell you what it
is which I'm going to do on my next slide right
so I strongly recommend that you have if you
haven't seen this relation before spend an hour
carefully thinking about what it is write out
what this relationship is between q1 Q2 and Q3
the quadrants is formed by three Aline and one
points all right so here's the theorem if A1 A2
A3 are aine and one points and q1 is the quadrant
between A2 and A3 Q2 is the quadrant between
A1 and A3 and Q3 is the quadrants between A1
and A2 then the triple quad formula is this q1
+ Q2 + Q3 all squared equal 2 * q1 2 + Q2 2 + Q3
squar this is certainly uh more sophisticated
or complicated algebraic expression that
occurs in Pythagoras's Theorem terms of quadrant
Pythagoras's Theorem is just q1 + Q2 = Q3 which
is very simple so it's perhaps not too surprising
that uid was not able to find this relation it's
algebraically a little bit sophisticated and the
ancient Greeks didn't have a good algebraic system
like we do now it's much easier for us to write
this down and appreciate it okay there's a little
bit of algebra that we need to uh talk about in
relation to this very very important formula and
you will grow to appreciate the importance of this
formula if you don't already let's have a look at
the difference between the left and the right
hand side q1 + Q2 + Q3 2 minus 2 * quantity q1
2 + Q2 2 + Q3 2 now we know how to expand this
because this is a trinomial theorem kind of of
situation we have a sum of three things and we
want to square it what do we get well I remind
you if you have q1 + Q2 + Q3 squ what you get
when you expand that is you get the sum of the
squares of the elements so you get q1 2 plus
Q2 2 plus Q3 2 and in addition you get twice
the various products of terms so you also get 2 *
q1 * Q2 you get 2 * Q2 * Q3 and 2 * q1 * Q3 so if
we look at this entire combination then we're
going to get those mixed terms I just told you
about 2 * q1 Q2 + Q2 Q3 + q1 Q3 and then you're
going to have the sum of the squares of the q's
and now we're subtracting here two times the sum
of the squares of the q's so we'll just get one
sum of squares of Q's subtracted right so I hope
you can all see that we can go from here to here
just by expanding this using the trinomial theorem
and now I want to make another observation that
this same quantity can be Rewritten in a different
but still also very important alternate way which
is however not symmetric anymore so this one here
is symmetric it treats q1 Q2 and Q3 exactly in a
similar fashion well this one here doesn't okay
but nevertheless this expression 4 q1 Q2 minus
the quantity q1 + Q2 minus Q3 all squared that's
the same thing as the first one and let's see why
that is so again okay we have this term here and
then we have this trinomial expansion again okay
so what we get when we expand this is we get minus
q1 2 plus Q2 2 plus the square of this will be Q3
s so we're going to get exactly this aspect here
and in terms of the two times the various products
we get min - 2 * q1 Q2 and that will combine with
this 4 q1 Q2 to give us exactly 2 q1 Q2 we'll also
get minus 2 * q1 * - Q3 which is a total of 2
* q1 Q3 and similarly get min - 2 * Q2 * - Q3
which is 2 * Q2 Q3 so if we expand this thing
out we also get exactly this showing the very
important relation that the triple quad relation
can be Rewritten in this sort of asymmetrical
way and for future reference let's introduce
this particular relation of this expression
involving q1 Q2 and Q3 say this one here
or equivalently this one here we're going
to say this is a of q1 Q2 Q3 and we're going
to call this Archimedes function so this a
is something that uh takes q1 Q2 and Q3 and
gives us this relation here either in this
form or in this form okay and if you haven't
followed exactly what I've been saying here
write it out please as an exercise check these
uh various equalities so let's give an example
of the triple quad formula before we prove
it here are three I find one points A1 is
the point 2 A2 is the point 5 A3 is the 7 what
are the associated quadran well q1 will be the
quadrants between A2 and A3 so that's 7 - 5 all
2 which is 4 Q2 is the quadrants between A3 and
A1 so that's 7 - 2 all 2ar which is 25 and Q3
is the quadrates between these two points which
will be 5 - 2^ 2 or 9 so the three quadrant is
involved are 4 25 and 9 and here's the triple
quad formula it asserts that 4 + 25 + 9 all
squared = 2 * 4 2 + 25 2 + 9 2 all right a
little bit of arithmetic you can check that in
fact that's true both sides of the equation are
1,444 now it's often simpler to check the
alternate form of the triple quad formula
that I gave you the asymmetrical form one of which
is q1 + Q2 minus Q3 ^2 = 4 q1 Q2 in fact this is
only one of three such asymmetric forms because
the original triple quad formula is symmetric so
we don't have to make Q3 the special one we could
have made q1 the special one or Q2 the special one
so if we made Q2 the special one it would read q1
+ Q3 minus Q2 S = 4 q1 * Q3 okay so let's check
this one which is a little bit easier q1 is 4 Q2
is 25 Q3 is 9 so we're asked to take 4 + 25 - 9
and square it and see that that's 4 * q1 * Q2
well the left hand side here this is a 25 + 4
is 29 - 9 that's 20 squared 20 SAR and over here
well five this is 5 * 5 and so we can see this
is 20 * 20 so yes we can see immediately without
actually having to calculate entirely that that's
correct okay and we'll just record again the
this asymmetric form of the triple quad formula
q1 + Q2 minus Q32 = 4 q1 * Q2 this will become
quite important for us later all right so how
do we prove this second most important theorem in
mathematics all right so here's our proof suppose
that A1 is the point A1 in Brackets A2 is the
point A2 in Brackets and A3 is the point A3 in
Brackets so these are three generic aine one
points what we want to do is we want to show
the triple quad formula and we're going to
show it in this asymmetric form that we've
just talked about so we want to prove that q1
+ Q2 minus Q32 = 4 * q1 * Q2 so let's have a
look at this expr q1 + Q2 - Q3 what is q1 q1 is
the quadrant between these two points so it's
A3 - A2 2 what's Q2 is the coordinantes between
A1 and A3 so it's A3 - A1 2 and then we have to
subtract Q3 which is the quadrants between A1 and
A2 namely A2 - A1 2 so what do we get when we EXP
expand these three things out and do a little
bit of simplification well there's going to be
an A3 squ appearing here and here so there's
going to be 2 A3 squar appearing we're going
to get twice the product here so we get minus 2
* A2 A3 we're also going to get twice the product
here so that'll be minus 2 A1 A3 and we're to
get minus twice the product here which is + 2
2 A1 A2 what we haven't taken care of yet is the
A2 squar that will appear in this term the A1 2qu
that will appear in this term and the minus
A2 2qu that comes from here and the minus A1
2qu that comes from there and they all cancel
so we just get these four terms if we pull out
the common factor of two then what we have inside
factors as A3 minus A2 * A3 - A1 because A3 * A3
is A3 2 A3 - A1 right there A2 * A3 with a minus
sign right there and the A1 A2 appearing with a
plus sign so all right so we have q1 + Q2 minus Q3
then it squared will be this thing squared which
is 4 * A3 - A2 2ar * A3 - A1 2ar and now we see
that this thing was what we called q1 and this
thing is what we called Q2 so we get the triple
quad formula in this asymmetric form and that's a
proof okay so you're probably wondering if you
don't know some rational trigonometry why is
this such an important uh and interesting formula
so it turns out that it has many ramifications in
Geometry many many many and we're going to
see the first of these ramifications in our
next video when we go back to the ancient
Greeks again back to Heron's formula and
an understanding of Archimedes we're going to
see how Heron's formula is really essentially
contained in this triple quad formula even though
surprisingly the triple quad formula is actually
just a one-dimensional result but this one
dimensional result somehow contains in it
aspects of higher dimensional geometries
it's quite an interesting phenomena so I
hope you'll join me for that I'm Norman
wildberger thanks for [Music] listening